[Music]
most the cancer research today
in contrast to what to what where what
we've defined
is focused on on the gene mutations
associated with with the disease
so um the the concept of personalized
medicine and cancer
involves the development of drugs that
will target
specific mutations that are found in
various tumors with the hope of
of of correcting the disease the pro the
problem with that strategy is is that
there are literally thousands
and some people have even estimated
millions of mutations in
in tumor cells uh which makes uh uh
the targeting of any one or a group of
of mutations a pretty daunting task
and most of these so-called targeted
therapies
come with a significant amount of
adverse toxic effects
which i've always found strange that if
a personalized medicine is supposed to
target
and kill cancer cells specifically
why why do the patients become so
violently ill
as the result of this so-called
personalized medicine
it appears to me that many of these
drugs have a very significant off-target
effect
uh on the body as well our approach to
this disease is
basically a non-toxic metabolic approach
that targets
the uh metabolic deficiency of the tumor
while enhancing the health and vitality
of normal cells a very striking contrast
it's a disease of mitochondrial function
which is the key
metabolic component within the cell and
when mitochondria become
dysfunctional one of the possible
consequences
is the origin of of cancer otto warburg
found many years ago that the
cancer cells are primarily fermenters of
of glucose they take glucose in they
they um
uh metabolize it up to the point of a
molecule called pyruvate which is then
fermented
and um it seems as though almost all
cancer cells
uh will will have this property and
and the reason for this is is because
their mitochondria
have suffered some sort of um
insufficiency or damage
and as the result the tumor cells then
must uh
ferment which is a very primitive form
of energy in order for them to survive
so most tumor cells will either ferment
glucose or possibly amino acids like
glutamine
uh for for their survival so this then
allows these cells to
to grow and and persist you can prevent
cancer simply by keeping your
mitochondria healthy
uh and what i mean by that is that with
age your mitochondria
uh get get inefficient and this is a
natural aging process that why cancer is
more common in older people than younger
people
therapeutic fasting is a great way to
enhance the the functionality of the
mitochondria
to prevent cancer you will not get
cancer if mitochondria are healthy it's
just
mitochondria are damaged by a variety of
different things in the environment
chemicals radiation inflammation
viruses even inherited gene mutations
that damage certain kinds of these
mutations
will damage the functionality of the
mitochondria thereby leading to
inherited forms of cancer
but by and large we can prevent cancer
if we can keep the mitochondria healthy
we have a very active research program
in epilepsy and
we have developed some of the best
animal models
for epileptic seizures that i i did with
collaborators in japan
um we we highlighted this one particular
model which is a replica of a human form
of seizure
and it's known for for decades that the
ketogenic diet is very effective against
seizures seizure disorders in children
and we tested this on our animal model
of epilepsy
and we found it to also be very very
therapeutic and
effective in blocking these seizures the
mechanism by which the diet
works against epilepsy is far less clear
than understanding the mechanism by
which the diet works to
target and and um kill tumor cells
interestingly enough but we found that
the
the the the the way these diets work is
through a calorie restriction the diets
do not work
if individuals or mice eat large amounts
of these
high fat diets so it was clearly linked
to a calorie restriction
so we uh we found that if we calorie
restricted
by a little bit these ketogenic diets
the therapeutic benefits of low glucose
and elevated ketones
become much greater than if one were
simply to restrict voluntarily restrict
uh calories from any kind of a diet so
our understanding of how the diet was
implemented for epilepsy
allowed us to fine-tune this and
transition it
for uh for cancer and as the result
um we think that the diet and this
metabolic approach
and speci to be specific the medi the
ketogenic diet matched with certain
low-dose non-toxic drugs
could potentially be far more
therapeutic for the cancer population
than it is for the
patients with epilepsy if we view cancer
as a genetic disease
um and as i've written in my book it's
not a genetic disease basically the gene
mutations
are downstream epiphenomena of damaged
respiration so so the mutations are
red herrings basically and the reason
why we're not making any major progress
is because
we're focusing on something that's not
the prime problem of the disease
and it's been very clear um and most of
the interestingly enough
those few drugs that have been had
rather good success in the clinic such
as gleevec and herceptin and these ones
that people have used
for various blood and breast cancers
actually target the same metabolic
pathway
that that does the ketogenic diet the
the difference is the ketogenic diet
will target
those pathways in all cancers whereas
the so-called personalized drugs
target those pathways only in those very
few individuals that might have that
mutation
so why anyone would want to use those
toxic drugs
when there's another alternative to do
the same thing without toxic
problems is a very difficult uh thing to
comprehend
the ketogenic diet which was originally
developed for treatment of epilepsy in
children
is a zero carbohydrate or very very low
carbohydrate high fat diet
and and what happens when when people
eat the ketogenic diet
in uh relatively restricted amounts
uh blood glucose levels go down and uh
ketones go up and ketones are breakdown
products of fats and they've
evolved to provide our brain with energy
when glucose is no longer available or
when people
don't have access ready access to food
our bodies can make energy from within
we mobilize fats the fats are then
metabolized to these ketones
which then the brain can use as a as an
alternative to glucose
so for the tumors now the tumors which
are dependent on glucose also
primarily for their growth will have
difficulty in now trying to compete with
normal cells
for the availability of a restricted
food
source which is glucose on the other
hand the tumor cells can't
utilize the ketones for energy as can
the normal cells
so this diet this metabolic therapy
pretty much restricts the primary fuels
for the tumor
while the body can transition uh to the
ketones
and and can actually get healthier with
this a very
a very nice way to to marginalize the
tumor growth
the ketogenic diet is um it's mostly
certain parts the way we define them is
a one to one two to one or three to one
this means
uh two parts fat to one part protein
plus carbohydrate
and the more ketogenic the diet is the
greater the amount of fat
so the most uh the most fat
laden diets would be a four to one four
parts fat to one part protein plus carb
now what these diets will consist of is
a variety of
of butters and creams and coconut oils
and these kinds of things
which are metabolized to ketone bodies
while keeping the carbohydrate content
of the diet
very low the proteins are a little bit
less than normal but they're not
they're not terribly restricted it's the
carbohydrates that are are primarily
restricted
so the content the amount that people
eat
is very important because um
[Music]
because if you eat a lot of this diet
it's not healthy because of all the fat
but if you eat a restricted amount of
the diet it can be very very healthy
um as the as the body begins to
transition off
and what we do with various individuals
who try it we move them from a
from a one to one type of diet all the
way up to a three to one or possibly a
four to one
and that makes the transition much more
much much easier for the for the
individual that would like to battle
their cancer
uh using this metabolic approach but the
key is a
high fat diet with low carbohydrates and
a transition or fine tuning of the diet
to match
every individual's type of metabolism so
it can be pal
so it can be accommodated a little bit
easier in their life the diet is very
well accepted for children
there's a group at johns hop hopkins
would like to see it as the first line
rather than a second line of approach
for cancer management in other words
if the child doesn't respond to the
ketogenic diet then then you would
consider a pharmaceutical approach
the the the the the the situation today
is that
when a child doesn't respond to pharmacy
after a number of
attempts at cocktails and this sort then
they'll be uh
recommended the ketogenic diet which in
many cases
is is very therapeutic um and you don't
have the toxic effects of the drugs
associated with that
so uh we we think this could also be uh
easily adapted to to cancer management
again with the same
high high therapeutic benefits with
minimal
if any toxicity so it's a it's a very
good
uh fit this is not a money generating
kind of an approach
so clinical trials uh who
will step forward to conduct the type of
clinical trial
that will that will provide evidence uh
for the use of this approach so so it's
not gaining is
as widespread use mainly because many of
the physicians or oncologists
never heard of it uh they're unfamiliar
with the basic concepts of this
they're not trained to use this there's
little money to be made in this approach
so you put all these together and it's
it's clear uh why this approach has not
has not been recognized as a as a very
effective alternative to the current
um radiation and toxic chemotherapies
that are presently being used i mean
right now there's a trial initiating at
the university of iowa for lung cancer
there's a trial that just completed in
germany
looking at you know tolerability of the
diet and they found it to be
mostly tolerable it had no toxic effects
on the patients
this is the european trial there's a new
trial
that's starting at the va at pittsburgh
pittsburgh va
which is just getting underway there's
another trial from a private
practice group out of bethesda maryland
which got
which just recently has approval and
they're recruiting patients at this time
the two studies that have been published
in humans one by linda nebling
in 1995 and the other one by by us
uh in in collaboration with a group of
italian
physicians uh both clearly show
efficacy in children and adults um so
uh there's a great need for more of
these kinds of trials
and and analyses in the human population
and there's a real possibility that the
humans will respond much better to this
therapy than
do the uh animal models the art that we
used in that book
um came prima primarily from the work of
robert pope
who um battled um uh hodgkin's disease
back in the 1990s and subsequently
passed away from that disease but during
his
um experience in in battling the disease
he was able to uh incorporate in his
artwork
the various um personal aspects
of of of of his uh his experience
and that of others who who he shared uh
experiences with in
in the cancer clinic uh i've used a
number of his
of his art of his artwork i was given
permission by the robert pope foundation
to do this
and they were quite they were quite
happy that i that i
that i did this i also used other images
from other individuals who have had
family members die from cancer
and how the how this disease impacts
the personal uh the personal experience
so i think
i think when you consider the images of
cancer you have to look at it from all
perspectives not only from a a metabolic
disease or a genetic disease or
a purely um abstract uh series of
of genetic mutations but actually what
what the disease represents
as a human as a human suffering possible
plans for follow-up layman's
version is certainly on on the table um
and i may i may need to do this at some
point
but but you're right about the fact that
there are a lot of lay people
significant numbers who have been able
to read
and understand a significant amount of
what was actually
in the book which is pleasing to me in
the sense that
it's it goes beyond just the scientific
community but you're right that
you're not going to move the field
forward unless those in the trenches
that are actually doing the work
are convinced that this is the right way
to go those in the pharmaceutical
industry those in the academic community
you can have a groundswell of interest
apart on the part of the lay public
but without having the scientific
evidence to support what's
what what the main thrust is it's going
to be hard to change the field
so the the most important aspect of this
of this book
is to target those key aspects that
people are currently investigating
with respect to the to the underlying
mechanisms of cancer
and once that can be shifted then uh
another book
uh which will actually be focused more
on the lay public
uh would certainly be in the works i'd
just like to mention that the book was
dedicated to the
millions of people who have suffered and
died from the toxic effects of
of chemotherapies and continue to do so
and i and i think this our approach is
um
one solution to this problem uh once the
underlying mechanisms
uh are recognized and uh and and uh
exploited
i think there's a real chance that um we
can make cancer a very
manageable disease with minimal uh uh
adverse effects to the to the
individuals that have this disease
the the boston college library was very
helpful
uh uh in providing access
of this book to a a number of students
both in form of the hardcover as well as
the e-book and the library has done a a
very excellent job
in making this book available to boston
college community and outside the
community as well
you